---
title: The good, the bad and the ugly - Perceptions from my India trip
date: 2016-12-25 16:25:57
tags: thoughts
---
I will head back to the United States tomorrow. I was deeply affected by the good, the bad and the ugly that I saw in India in these few weeks. I've drawn some opinions based on these observations that I would like to share. These opinions may have changed if I stayed here longer. As for the bad and the ugly, they are entirely my opinions and you are welcome to say that I should think about solutions rather than complain about things, and believe me I will take you up on that.

<!-- more -->

## The good
1. The youth has been re-invigorated. Entrepreneurship is on the rise, and the playground is fairer than ever. People are taking chances and plenty of difficult problems are getting solved. If I were to pick one that impressed me the most - PayTM. No question about it. Also, the fact that Uber works with cash and unplanned cities amazes and excites me.

2. Movies seem to have more substance than they ever did. Music is also good.

3. People are gradually opening up to necessary change,  however painful, if they are convinced that it's for good.  Everybody is sick of corruption.

4. More high quality education is available. Sadly, it seems the stress on primarily engineering and medical degrees continues.

## The bad
1. If you look away for a minute, 4 times out of 5 you'll get bilked of something  (exaggerated statistic, but you get the point). I had first hand experience of this when I bought a phone recently that stopped working in 6 days. God, the run around I was given instead of simply replacing the phone. This was Reliance, a well known chain of supermarkets, and they supposedly had a 7 day return policy. I had to wait in a crowded "authorized repair shop" 5mi from the store, with no a/c for 2 hours with extremely rude staff who treated customers like crap (if you should know, it was the Gionee service center in Bhubaneswar, near BMC mall). Everybody was frustrated and feeling helpless. Reminded me of DMV in the US, only this was 10 times worse. This still happens a lot in India, especially in banks, government offices, etc. Also salesmen and women at several electronics stores I went to didn't know much about anything they sold. I called them out a few times. May be all this is better in big cities.

2. Many people still don't have pride in themselves, in their country and respect for their fellow human being. Because if they did, they wouldn't throw trash out on the streets, push and shove each other to get ahead in traffic or in a line at the bank. But seriously, the lack of sense of hygiene in some parts of big cities seriously bothers me. I hope the *Swachh Bharat* (Clean India) campaign that the government has begun actually works. Again I think this is a solvable problem and it'll just take some time.

3. Children don't have a childhood anymore. Every child is studying for multiple exams at any given time. Children don't know what playing is. There still isn't a good process for kids talented in sports, music, etc to rise and shine at national level. Good sportsmen/women only seem to come out of a few designated corridors. Something like NCAA (without the associated BS) could do wonders here. Until then most kids will either be engineers or doctors.

4. Aping the west to somehow feel superior, that's something that was there when I left, and it's still there now among the youth. Only in a greater measure. It's not like these youngsters aren't proud of who they are, but they are confused as hell about what they should be to be cooler than the crowd. And more often than not they end up making apes of themselves. I know this is a controversial opinion, but that's what I have perceived of what I have observed here. Reminds me of something that happened in this trip. That day I was hanging out at Lalit and I ended up hanging out with these rich Indian kids from Dubai with Ferraris and everything and apparently nothing they couldn't have. They ask me, "hey why do you have a fake accent, aren't you proud to be Indian?" They were talking about my stressing syllables in an American way. I said, well I've lived in the US for a third of my life, I've spent my 20s there, I've made lasting friendships there, ate their food, breathed their air, so I see nothing wrong with speaking their language the way they do and understand,  because I feel like I'm a part of them in a way. It's got nothing to do with me not being proud of my roots. I own my roots. Moreover, if you lived in Maharashtra for 10 years and spoke Marathi like a Maratha, would you deliberately change it back if you went home to Punjab on a 2-day trip? I spoke to them in Hindi many times that evening but a few of them never got over my accent until I had to be rude and ask them to back off because they weren't going to try and change me that night. What surprised me is that minutes after that, they requested an American hip hop song, sang along to it, shook their heads, grabbed their crotches and the whole 9 yards like they were straight outta Harlem or something. I saw more instances of this confused aping of the West throughout my stay, just like I always see on my trips to India and resent. I see nothing wrong with appreciating the music and culture of another country, and imbibing what you like, but why the double standards and why associate whatever is not Indian to be cool if you do it and fake if you see it in somebody else and be jealous? It's messed up, to be honest and I have seen it a lot over the years. What I mentioned here is just one instance. It saddens me that this attitude still plagues the youth of India.

## The ugly
1. I don't know if this is good or bad, but young people seem to have turned into degenerates after Tinder and flashy nightclubs got introduced in India. I might sound like an old fashioned man saying this,  but I am just reporting a change in the social fabric that is quite conspicuous. I am not against Tinder and nightclubs at all, and you know this if you even remotely know me. But in India, everything from being a movie star to getting laid is about looks, so a handful live the dream and millions drool and live off the leftovers. A side effect I see is that both men and women have easy access to sexual encounters and somehow this has affected how they choose their partners for relationships and marriage. Nothing short of a Greek God or Goddess will do. Also, I see a lot more failed marriages. Strong families were one of the core strengths of the Indian society and somehow I see its foundations shaking. It's not ready to fall yet, and may not be noticeable yet either,  but I can see it coming.

The biggest concern I see is that the divide between the haves and the have nots still continues to not be bridged completely. But there is hope. I definitely see it. Especially with so many bright entrepreneurs.

## Where do I stand
As for me, I belong to a breed of NRIs, or first generation migrants who are, I don't know if torn would be the right word, but ones who feel at home in two whole different worlds. Personally, I feel more at home in the US because I've spent most of my adult life there, but the roots are still Indian, and attachment to family still exists. If I were to ever raise a family and have kids, I don't have a doubt given what I see now that they will have a better future, better opportunities and a better shot at life in the US. US also has its downsides but it seems more manageable to me. The only reason I would ever want to consider coming back would be for my mom and dad and it would be a difficult decision when I do. I know a vast majority of Indian (and even American) people would have no understanding of this sentiment and would even call it hypocrisy, but I don't blame them. You really have to walk in my shoes to understand anything I am saying.